Sources:
https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/computer-programming/programming/good-practices/a/planning-a-programming-project

Kudos to you for asking for help. Too many people nowadays just want to learn to code, putting the cart before the horse, when what they really should be focusing on is how to understand their problems and plan out their solutions. You can't (well, shouldn't) code for something you don't understand. Make an outline First, write down the problem you're trying to solve. "I need to do X." Break that idea down into a list of steps, like "1) Collect the data, 2) Transform the data, 3) Process the data, 4) Report the result." Then take each step and break it down further into the actions required. You may need to make separate outlines if there are several discrete processes to be followed. Make a flowchart This is optional, but it's what we were taught when I took programming courses a long time ago. Not sure if they still teach this. Making flowcharts is an art unto itself. Good flowcharts are crucial to designing and understanding complex algorithms, and for conveying ideas to other developers. Bad flowcharts just muddle up the process and can confuse your collaborators. Do some research on things like "flowchart tips" and "good flowchart examples" to help with this. Model your data Again optional, but probably required, depends on what information you're working with. Good models can really help streamline the development process, especially in groups of developers. Write down each type of object or item you need to keep track of, a list of information about each item (properties), and the actions you need to perform on them (methods). You'll also need to track the relationships each model has to the others. UML diagrams are good for this. Sketch your interfaces Now that you have a good grasp on what data you're working with and what you want to do with it, you can start working on how to present that data to the user. The logic described in the steps above should inform how the UI is going to come together. You don't have to be a professional UI/UX designer to throw together something useful. That's still not even the half of it, but these are most of the things you can do to get started planning, without ever writing a single line of code. Heck, all of these things can be done with a pencil and paper. You'll still need to build the interfaces, write the code for the models, write the application logic, and hopefully test the crap out of it.